---
layout:     post
title:      "Download sequencing data from NCBI using sratools in macOS"
author:     "Cooper"
header-img: "img/post-bg-2015.jpg"
catalog: true
typora-root-url: ../
tags:
    - Bioinformatic tools
    
---

`sratools` is a useful tool for downloading sequencing data from NCBI.

# Installation

You can download `sratools` from [here](http://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/sdk/current/sratoolkit.current-mac64.tar.gz) on website or you can do it with commandLine

```
curl --output sratoolkit.tar.gz http://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/sdk/current/sratoolkit.current-mac64.tar.gz
```

Then extract the contents of the tar file

```
tar -vxzf sratoolkit.tar.gz
```

Use `pwd` to see where your path is, then add it to environment variable 

```
export PATH=$PATH:~/bio/software/sratoolkit.3.0.0-mac64/bin
```

Don't forget to `source` your `~/.bashrc` or `~/.zshrc`, depending on what kind of `shell` you're using.

Then you should enable your `Security & Privacy` allowing the permission of software.

Alternatively, you can install `sratools` by using `brew`

```
brew install sratools
```



# Usage

*First of all, you should learn how to search in [SRA Enterz](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sradownload/).*

## **Downloading public data**

**Prefetch** is a part of the **SRA toolkit**. This program downloads Runs (sequence files in the compressed SRA format) and all additional data necessary to convert the Run from the SRA format to a more commonly used format. ==Prefetch can be used to correct and finish an incomplete Run download.==

Download one Run:

```
prefetch SRR000001
```

Download a list of Runs:

```
prefetch --option-file SraAccList.txt
```

`faster-dump` and `sam-dump` are part of  **SRA toolkit** that can be use to convert protected Runs from compressed **SRA** to **fastq** or **sam** format.

```
faster-dump SRR11180057.sra
```

You can also do above jobs in one step, avoiding the `prefetch`

```
faster-dump SRR11180057
```



## Downloading metadata associated with SRA data

SRA Run files do not contain any information about the metadata, such as sample information.

To download metadata for each Run, you can click **Send to** on the right top of the page.

Alternatively, you can use **Run Selector**, which provide useful and various filters to refine your search results.



# Reference

[sratools](https://github.com/ncbi/sra-tools/wiki/02.-Installing-SRA-Toolkit)

